---
title: "Notes on How Your Nervous System Works & Changes, Huberman Lab Podcast #1"
date: 2022-07-03
categories: 
  - Neuroscience
  - Huberman Lab
tags:
  - Podcast Notes
excerpt: Notes from Episode 1 | How Your Nervous System Works & Changes from the Huberman Lab Podcast
---

{% include video id="H-XfCl-HpRM" provider="youtube" %}

# What is the Nervous System ?

It's important to remember that the brain is just one piece of the Nervous System. The Nervous System as a whole consists of the Brain, Spinal Cord and connections between the brain, spinal cord and other organs. It is rather a continuous loop of communication between the brain, spinal cord and the body. (Compared to a Möbius strip in the podcast). It's important to remember that the Nervous System is also responsible for other actions. It tells immune organs where to send the protective cells of our body (WBCs: White Blood Cells). It also causes the "ache" in stomach ache. It governs all other biological systems and is also influenced by said other systems.

> Earlier it was believed that the Nervous System was just one giant cell. But then [Ramon Y Cajal](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Santiago_Ram%C3%B3n_y_Cajal) and [Camillo Golgi](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camillo_Golgi) figured out how to stain/label the nervous system and subsequently figured out that the nervous system contains trillions of smaller cells (neurons) and have gaps between them called synapses responsible for transferring electricity/potential among these neurons.

## Déjà vu

Memories are stored as patterns of electricity in neurons which when repeated gives us the sense of it being repeated. Déjà vu is the phenomenon during which the neurons that were active in one circumstance are now being active in a similar circumstance again.

⭐️⭐️ The Electrical activity of our neurons dictates our experience ⭐️⭐️

## How War, Guns & Soap Shaped our understanding of the brain

In World War I, some changes to bullets were made that made them enter and exit the body at discrete locations making small exit wounds, thereby destroying small bits of the nervous system (i.e. Lesion Theory). Neurologists had a collection of patients with holes in specific things, thereby allowing them to make certain inferences about brain regions

## Jennifer Aniston Neurons

A paper in Nature, showed that in a human being there was a neuron that would become active only when they viewed a picture of Jennifer Aniston (thus the name "Jennifer Aniston Cells")

---

# 🧠 Brain

Our Brain essentially does 5 things

## 1. Sensations

Sensation is a non-negotiable element of the Nervous System. Our entire experience of life is filtered by sensory receptors (eyes, ears, ....). Therefore is our experience limited ? Yup. For instance infrared vision, snakes can sense heat signatures. Humans can't. Birds can migrate because they have neurons that are receptive to magnetic fields to mate. Humans can't sense magnetic fields.

## 2. Perception

Perception is the ability to take what we're sensing and focus on it i.e. whatever sensation we are paying attention to. **Perception is under the control of our Attention**. Attention is like a spotlight, and we can have multiple spotlights.

> **Bottom up vs Top Down Control of Behavior:** Our Nervous system has a two way street of communication between the *reflexive* and *deliberate* aspects of our Nervous System. Bottom up meaning information is flowing up and is directing our activity. This is done passively. Top Down meaning deliberate action which requires Attention and Focus. Our body gets used to doing things which don't require much metabolic activity but once we start doing things that require attention and focus we experience mental friction

## 3. Feelings/Emotions and the chemicals associated with it

Emotions and Feelings are the product of the Nervous System and they involve the activity of neurons. Neuromodulators are a category of chemicals which have profound influence over our emotional states. They bias certain neurons to be active and some to be inactive. Feelings and Emotions are conceptual, therefore it's incorrect to say that there are sadness or happiness areas/circuits in the brain. It is however fair to say that certain circuits are activated when we are in (non-)motivated states. Emotions are something that we feel aren't under our control. They are somewhat reflexive.

> **Antidepressenats/Anti-psychotics:** In the 50s,60s and 70s it was discovered that there are compounds that can affect serotonin/dopamine levels which led to their development. Most of these drugs especially back then increased/decreased a bunch of Neuromodulators instead of specific ones.

## 4. Thoughts

Thoughts are interesting because like perception they draw from the present but also from things we remember from the past and the things we anticipate from the future. Thoughts can be both reflexive and deliberate.

## 5. Actions/Behavior

These are very important because our behaviors are the only things that can create any fossil record of our existence. The Sensations, Perceptions, Feelings and Thoughts that we have in our lifespan are not carried forward except the ones that we take and convert into actions. Sherrington won the Nobel Prize for his work in mapping some circuitry which give rise to movement.

---

**Q:** What does it mean for our Nervous System to do something deliberately ?

**A:** When we do we something deliberately, we pay attention i.e. we are bringing our perception to an analysis of three things (*DPO*) :

1. Duration: How long smth is going to take or should be done
2. Path: What we should be doing
3. Outcome: If we do smth for a given length of time, what will happen

---

# Neuroplasticity

Plasticity is just a process by which neurons can change their connections and the way they work to make actions go from deliberate to reflexive. 

If you're an an adult trying to change your neural circuitry you need to ask yourself two important questions: 

1.  What aspect of the neural system are you trying to change (Emotion, Perception, Sensation) and which ones are available for you to change

2. How are you going to go about that ? The structure of the regimen ?(Governed by how awake or sleepy you are)

Neuroplasticity is the ability of the connections in your brain and body to change in response to experience. Humans can direct our own neural changes. The same can't be said about other organs in the body. Although they change we can't direct it. Ex: People blind at birth have reorganized circuity which showed that the parts of the brain responsible for visual stimulus had reorganized to read Braille[^1][^2][^3]

## Portal to Neuroplasticity

Plasticity in the Adult Human Nervous System is gated by neuromodulators. These Neuromodulators open up and allow for plasticity in brief periods of time. This has a dark and positive side. Dark Side: It's very easy to get neuroplasticity as an adult through traumatic and challenging experiences. but why ? because when something bad happens, epinephrine(more alert) and acetylcholine(helps to create a better attention spotlight) are released. This strengthens the circuitry. The dirty secret of neuroplasticity is that it doesn't occur during the thing you're trying to learn/do. But rather it happens when you sleep/non-sleep deep rest.

## The Pillar of Plasticity

The Autonomic Nervous System (ANS) is very important for neuroplasticity works like a seesaw. In the morning we are alert and then towards the evening we tend to become more calm. Both of which are important to learning and neuroplasticity.

[^1]: [Massive cortical reorganization in sighted Braille readers](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4805536/)

[^2]: [Neuroplasticity and Braille reading](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32724286/)

[^3]: [Neural networks for Braille reading by the blind](https://academic.oup.com/brain/article/121/7/1213/263424?login=false)

